In this lesson, we will discuss 3D data representations,
including some of the desired characteristics of an optimal representation.
Probabilistic data representations can be used to
accommodate for sensor noise and dynamic environments.
It is important to be able to distinguish data
that represents an area that is free space,
versus an area that is unknown or not yet mapped.
This will enable the robot to plan an unobstructed path,
and build a complete map.
Memory on a mobile robot is typically a limited resource.
So memory efficiency is very important.
The map should also be accessible in the robot's main memory,
while mapping a large area over a long period of time.
To accomplish this, we need a data representation that is compact,
and allows for efficient updates and queries.
Some data representations of 3D environments that you'll learn
about are point clouds, voxels and octrees.
Also, you can read about elevation maps,
and multilevel surface maps in the references provided.
A 3D point cloud is a set of data points corresponding to range measurements,
each at defined x y z coordinates.
A disadvantage with point cloud data is that information
only exists about where things are in the world.
The data looks the same whether the space is unoccupied or unknown.
Point clouds also store a large amount of measurement points.
And with each scan, you need to allocate more memory,
So they are not memory-efficient.
Our 3D voxel grid is
a volumetric data representation using a grid of cubic volumes of equal size.
This is a probabilistic representation.
So you can estimate whether the voxel grid is occupied,
free, or unknown space.
One drawback of a 3D voxel grid is that the size of
the area must be known or approximated before measurement,
which may not always be possible.
A second drawback is that the complete map must be allocated in memory.
So the overall memory requirement is high.
Octrees are a memory efficient tree based data representation.
On the left, you will see
the volumetric representation and on the right, the tree-based representations.
These trees can be dynamically expanded to different resolutions and different areas,
where every voxel can be subdivided into eight voxels recursively.
The size of the map doesn't need to be known beforehand,
because mapped volumes aren't initialized until you need to add new measurements.
Octrees have been used to adapt occupancy grid mapping from 2D to 3D,
introducing probabilistic representation of occupied versus freespace.